>> Will Sentance: Line one,
James, what are we doing?
>> James: You are declaring
a function called PrintHello
>> Will Sentance: Excellent,
good job from James.
Line two, who have I not called?
I called on almost every person now.
>> Will Sentance: I've called on every
single person, Mike,
line two, what are we doing?
>> Mike: The function block for
one sec is declared.
>> Will Sentance: Block for one sec.
And for we're not specifying how it
works necessarily, but this function,
when it's called, is gonna sit on
the call stack for 1,000 milliseconds.
This is not a function that's
sending work off the background.
It's gonna sit there for
1,000 milliseconds.
Sonia can you think of a way in which
I could write that functions such
that I did that?
What could I do that would
take a 1,000 milliseconds?
It's gotta be in the que of jobs threads,
it's gonna be doing
something very very fast.
Mini-tasks, very very fast.
Ben, what can you think of?
>> Ben: Looping.
>> Will Sentance: Looping, exactly
looping will do that.
Lots of little processing steps very,
very fast.
It's gonna be a big loop to
last 1000 milliseconds in
a modern JavaScript engine.
Big old loop.
But there is a loop long enough
that would last 1000 milliseconds.
You're not doing it outside of JavaScript.
It's very much pure JavaScript.
And therefore is blocking us continuing in
our code when that function is called for
1000 milliseconds.
Excellent.
Now, now Mike, we are gonna call
setTimeout with the argument,
the print hello
function definition we're definitely
not calling it and the argument 0.
So Mike try to talk me through
what's going to happen here,
and it's going to be in terms of
our web browser features isn't it.
So what's going to happen here Mike?
>> Mike: I'm not sure.
I just know it's not.
>> Will Sentance: So
what is setTimeout been set up.
>> Ben: It's going to
set up a local execution context.
>> Will Sentance: Is it?
>> Ben: No, it's going to call a facade
function.
>> Will Sentance: Ha.
SetTimeout does,
what does it do anything in JavaScript?
>> Ben: No.
>> Will Sentance: It does nothing in
JavaScript.
Instead, it is going to, it's a label,
it's a facade function for
a web browser feature.
Which feature, Ben?
>> Ben: Timer.
>> Will Sentance: Timer, so
it's going to spin up
a web browser feature,
the feature timer.
And it's going to take in the two
important things it needs to know.
And in the web browser,
how many milliseconds, Mike,
is this timer going to be running for?
>> Mike: Zero.
>> Will Sentance: Zero milliseconds and so
at say one millisecond,
which is when we're
kicking this off, is this timer complete?
Mike?
It's instantly complete.
Exactly.
And on completion, what do we want to do?
We want to call print hello.
We want to pass it back into JavaScript or
refer to it in JavaScript and
kick it off running in JavaScript.
>> Will Sentance: So
print hello is immediately ready to run,
so
do we add it straight to the call stack?
>> off screen: No.
>> Will Sentance: Why not?
>> off screen: It's
blocking.
>> Will Sentance: No.
But it's here ready.
It's ready to go back on.
>> off screen: Because you're not in the
JavaScript context or in browser's world.
>> Will Sentance: But we are.
We're back in JavaScript context.
Look.
Next line is two milliseconds.
Why can't this guy look come back.
We said whenever it's ready
come back on the call stack.
Yeah, you're right though.
The next line of code we're going to
hit at 2 milliseconds is block 41 sec.
We're not sure how it's going to work but
we do know when we go into it,
we're going to spend how many
milliseconds inside of it,
Josh?
>> Josh: Milliseconds?
1000.
>> Will Sentance: 1000, good.
Well done to Josh, by the way, for his
good second to millisecond adjustments.
Exactly, plus 1000 milliseconds.
That's going to sit on our call stack,
so we had global on the bottom,
block for one sec
>> Will Sentance: Is gonna sit on our
call stack for 1000 milliseconds.
Maybe during it,
print hello is ready to go.
it jumps on top and starts running.
Does it do that?
That would be a terrible language.
>> [LAUGH]
>> Will Sentance: Maybe possible.
I mean it's certainly possible.
But that would be very arbitrary, very
arbitrary for when our code would execute.
So it definitely can't do,
as Michelle said, it definitely can't
pass print hello back onto the call
stack during another function execution.
That looks pretty clear.
It kind of sort of random arbitrary.
But maybe once that function's
finished executing, yeah,
once that function's finished
executing and we get block for
one sec off the call stack and
we return our thread back out
at an 1002 milliseconds, maybe now print
hello is allowed back on the call stack.
Who thinks it's allowed
back on the call stack?
I'm doing my the answer's no voice.
Who thinks it's allowed
back on the call stack?
>> Alec: Maybe.
>> Will Sentance: Yeah, Alec, maybe,
>> [LAUGH]
>> Will Sentance: Unfortunately, no.
Even though poor little print hello,
it's been sitting there.
I'm ready to run, run me,
been ready to run for, at this point,
1,001 milliseconds from when
it was first kicked off.
The timer was kicked off,
it was instantly complete,
print hello was instantly ready to come
back on, but it wasn't allowed back on.
We'll see the exact rule why,
actually we're gonna hit next console log.
Me, good old me first.
If it ever says me first you know
it's gonna console log it first.
There it is, me first.
At 1002 milliseconds.
>> Will Sentance: Okay.
Now do we think at this point as we've
finished all of our global code,
do we think now print
hello is allowed back on?
Print Hello is now allowed back on.
But how does it get back on?
It turns out that we need two
more pieces to our puzzle.
We need a fundamental rule.
Our fundamental rule for
when deferred functionality.
Now yes,
it was only deferred by zero milliseconds.
But it was still thrown out of JavaScript
and associated with a web browser.
It was thrown out of JavaScript.
We need a rule for when that thing that's
been thrown out of JavaScript is allowed
back into JavaScript.
And we have one simple rule,
I must have finished emptying my call
stack of any functionality to be run,
and finish running all my global
synchronous code, all my codes.
I could have 1000 console logs.
Kind of crazy.
I could have spun up this differed
functionality inside a function call,
come out of it.
Have 1000 calls, I could have a while loop
that's infinite with console logs in.
And I'll never allow print
hello back on the call stack.
It's never allowed back in.
Why?
Because when I finish my
background features work,
print hello does not go
straight to the call stack.
As Brian was hinting,
it goes to something called a queue.
It gets queued up as a callback I guess.
This has a few names, the task queue.
Can we even call it the macro
task queue at the moment?
But the call back queue
is a queue of functions
that are ready to come on the call stack.
There it is print hello, Blessing,
approximately what millisecond was
print hello added to the call back queue?
>> Blessing: One millisecond.
>> Will Sentance: At approximately one
millisecond exactly, there it is one
millisecond and then we have our rule.
When is this function
allowed back into JavaScript?
It's allowed back into JavaScript
only when the call stack is empty and
all our global code is finished running.
And that rule, or the checking
of that rule, has a posh name.
It's a little sort of process,
it's a metaphorical process.
The whole process is looping,
and checking really fast.
Is the course AMD?
Is all the global code finished running?
Has the queue got anything in it?
Is the course AMD?
Queue has anything?
And that is known as the event loop.
It's job is to say is the course AMD
finished running all it's stuff?
Is the global code finished executing?
Is something in the core?
Yes there is!
This was not empty for a long time, at
this point event loop's going no, no, no,
we can't add anything on to the call stack
because it's got blocked for one second.
But even then, console log's
sitting there that needs to be run.
It's ready to be run in
the global execution context.
Ha, at this moment the event
goes is the courser empty?
Yes it is.
The callback here has something in it so
print hello,
you arefinally 1001 milliseconds after
you were deferred for 0 milliseconds,
you are finally allowed back onto
the call stack at 1003 milliseconds.
And note these timings are ordinal.
They're not, they're ordinal,
besides the cardinal ones,
okay.
>> Will Sentance: Ordinal meaning it's
about the ordering of them,
at 1003 milliseconds.
Finally, print hello is allowed
back on our call stack,
at 1003 milliseconds,
we print hello there it is people.
A beautiful process of deferring our
functionality, to then only be allowed
back into JavaScript under a certain
condition, that condition is checked for
by this event loop that's checking it
looping very fast that is metaphorical but
it is looping very fast
to check this condition.
Is the callback que,
does it have something in it?
It does allow it back on when our
call stack is entirely empty and
our global execution context has
finished running all of it's code.
And that's it.
These six parts are the core of our
asynchronous model of JavaScript.
Solution three is gonna show us that
JavaScript recently introduced two new
additional parts to this model.
We're gonna see them in solution three.
But for now,
thumbs on this core six parts, memory,
thread of execution, call stack
representing our execution context,
our web browser features, our callback
queue where when our web browser feature
finishes its work is where our
function is going to be sent.
That was deferred by our facade function
that spun up that web
browser feature timer.
And finally, our event loop that
checks that callback queue.
It says is something in there?
Is our call stack good and
empty with no global code to run?
And says okay, you're allowed back on.